The Project Gutenberg eBook of How Old Is It? The Story of Dating in
Archeaology, by James Schoenwetter

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: How Old Is It? The Story of Dating in Archeaology
       Museum of New Mexico Press, Popular Series Pamphlet No. 2

Author: James Schoenwetter

Illustrator: Mary Spencer
             Phyllis Hughes

Release Date: April 24, 2021 [eBook #65151]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW OLD IS IT? THE STORY OF DATING
IN ARCHEAOLOGY ***




                             HOW OLD IS IT?


                   THE STORY OF DATING IN ARCHAEOLOGY


                       MUSEUM OF NEW MEXICO PRESS
                     POPULAR SERIES PAMPHLET NO. 2




                                                          HOW OLD IS IT?
                                                   DATING IN ARCHAEOLOGY
                                                 _by James Schoenwetter_


There is a whole field of science devoted to the invention and
development of dating methods—or “clocks” as we may think of them. It is
called _geochronology_, the science of dating events. There are
relatively few geochronologists, scientists trained in the use of all
kinds of dating methods and in the theories upon which these methods are
based.

Geochronologists tell us that there are two major types of clocks: those
that tick at an absolute rate of speed which can be measured, and those
which tick only once in a while. A clock of the first type yields what
is called an _absolute_ date, revealing the number of hours, days,
years, centuries or millennia since an event occurred. A clock of the
second type yields what is called a _relative_ date, placing an event as
before or after another event, but does not tell us exactly how far they
are apart in time nor how long ago they occurred.

Depending upon how accurate his date must be to solve the problem he has
set for himself, the archaeologist will select absolute or relative
dating methods. Often, of course, the type of clock he wishes to use is
not available, and he must use the next best type. Probably he will try
to use a number of clocks of different kinds on the problem since each
clock will act as a check on the others.

The absolute clock utilized most widely in archaeology is the historical
record. Men have used calendars for a long time, and have often left
records with written dates. On tombstones at a site in old Virginia, on
the pedestals of statues and other monuments from classical Greece and
Rome, on the walls of the tombs of Egyptian kings, dates are clearly
inscribed which can be related to the sites dug into by the
archaeologists. These dates must often be recalculated in terms of the
Christian calendar which we use. Most calendars in use in the
Mediterranean, the Near East and China during classical antiquity have
been successfully correlated with the one we use today, and a date
inscribed or noted on such sites can be considered in our own terms.
Other calendars, such as those developed in the ancient cultures of the
Maya on the Yucatan Peninsula, have yet to be accurately correlated with
our own. Such calendars can be used on their own terms of course, and a
site which has an inscription in the Mayan calendar is known to be so
many years older or younger than another one with a different date in
that calendar. We speak of such a situation as a _floating chronology_.
That is, the sequence of events and the number of years which separate
them are known, but the dates of those events in absolute time are
unknown.

    [Illustration: (uncaptioned)]

Tree rings afford another kind of absolute clock, the _dendrological_
method. Each year a tree adds a growth ring. Depending on the amount of
water the tree has available to it for cell growth, the ring will be
wider or narrower. Certain trees whose water requirements are high live
near streams or other places where their roots can tap a constant supply
of water. Such trees, referred to as _complacent_, have annual rings
which are all of about the same width. Other _sensitive_ trees live in
places where they must depend almost wholly on rainfall for their water
supply, as on the slopes of hills or in the clefts of rocks. Such trees
have annual rings which vary in width depending upon the amount of rain
they receive. In any given area, especially in arid and semiarid
regions, some years have more rainfall than others. The sensitive trees
will produce wider rings during years when there is more rainfall and
narrower rings in years when there is less. Often there are periods of a
decade or so when all of the sensitive trees will produce the same
pattern of ring growth; for example, three years of narrow rings, one
year of wide, two more of narrow and three more of wide. Such a pattern
is called a _signature_.

Signatures are the basis of tree ring chronologies. All the trees in a
region did not begin growing at the same time of course, but every time
there is a series of years which will produce a signature, all the
sensitive trees still alive will have that signature. Let us say we cut
down a sensitive tree in 1960 and, by counting back the rings, find
signatures at 1940-45, 1910-14, 1880-89, 1821-27, 1795-1800 and 1750-58.
Next we recover a beam from an abandoned Spanish Mission built in 1810.
It happens to be from a sensitive tree, and we can spot the 1795-1800
and the 1750-58 signatures near the outer rings. Now we have two records
which can be said to be _crossdated_. Let us assume that the Spanish
Mission log give us signatures as far back as 1350. An abandoned Indian
pueblo produces a log with signatures crossdating those of the Spanish
Mission log and continuing the record back to 1250. Older and older
archeological sites will yield older and older signatures with each log
crossdating some of the signatures of younger logs.

At present we have a tree ring calendar for certain species of trees
extending back to about 100 B.C. This is called a _master tree ring
chronology_. A log from an archaeological site may contain only one or
two signatures and be, in itself, a floating chronology, but by
comparison with the master chronology one can determine the cutting
date. Having a series of cutting dates for the construction timbers in
an archaeological site yields the probable dates at which the site was
built and occupied.

    [Illustration: _Diagram to Illustrate Tree Ring Dating. Reproduced
    by special permission from Stallings, “Dating Prehistoric Ruins by
    Tree-Rings.”_]

  C THIS BEAM CAME FROM AN OLD HOUSE
  B THIS BEAM CAME FROM A HOUSE
  A THIS WAS A LIVING TREE WHEN CUT BY US
  THE RING PATTERNS MATCH AND OVERLAP BACK INTO TIME
  SPECIMENS TAKEN FROM RUINS, WHEN MATCHED AND OVERLAPPED AS INDICATED,
          PROGRESSIVELY EXTEND THE DATING BACK INTO PREHISTORIC TIMES.

Not all kinds of trees can be used for dendrochronology. Pine, fir and
pinyon are the most useful; juniper can sometimes be used. Oak,
cottonwood, willow and others are very difficult to date and frequently
cannot be used at all.

Another widely used absolute clock is that based upon the orderly
decomposition of carbon. This is the _radiocarbon_ or C-14 method of
dating. Molecules of various substances are made up of atoms. We know
now that not all atoms of a substance are precisely the same. We speak
of _isotopes_ of an atom. To clarify this let us think of the atoms of
carbon as being made up of a mass of ping-pong balls. Some atoms will
have more ping-pong balls than others, but all will have enough and in
the proper order to be carbon atoms. Each of the atoms with 14 ping-pong
balls we shall refer to as the carbon-14 isotope of carbon. There will
be other isotopes of carbon atoms too.

The carbon-14 isotope is about average in life span. It has been
determined that in any group of C-14 isotopes half of them will lose two
of their ping-pong balls and become C-12 isotopes in 5,730 years, plus
or minus 40. This is known as the _half-life_ of the C-14 isotope. The
“plus or minus 40” allows for laboratory error in terms of years.

Now all living things contain carbon atoms, and some of those atoms are
C-14 isotopes. The amount of C-14 isotopes in a living organism quickly
reaches a stable percentage after which there is no increase or decrease
while the organism is alive. After it dies, the C-14 supply is not
replenished, and with the passing of 5,730 plus or minus 40 years, it
has half the number of C-14 isotopes it had when alive. In 11,460 plus
or minus 80 years, it will have one quarter as many as it had when
alive.

The geochronologist takes a certain weight of carbon-bearing matter from
an organism which once lived. With simple chemistry he can determine the
number of carbon atoms in the material, usually charcoal, wood, bone or
shell. He places the material in a chamber equipped with geiger counters
and records the number of C-14 isotopes converting to C-12 isotopes
within a certain number of hours or days. Since he knows how many carbon
atoms there are in the specimen, he knows how many C-14 isotopes there
would be if the specimen were alive. He also knows that as the number of
C-14 atoms decreases the number of clicks on the geiger counter will
decrease too. For example, if there are 2,000 C-14 isotopes, the
decomposition of half of these over a period of approximately 5,730
years would register 1,000 clicks on the counter. In the next 5,730 year
period there would be 1,000 isotopes left, and only 500 of them would
decompose to register as geiger counter clicks.

The geochronologist does the counting and analysis of the results and
sends the information back to the archaeologist in the form of the
number of years that have elapsed since the carbon was part of a living
creature; for example, 1,500 plus or minus 150 years BP (before
present). The archaeologist, converting this to the Christian calendar
in 1964, would come up with A.D. 464 plus or minus 150 years. When was
the sample actually alive? We don’t know exactly, but statistically we
have a ninety-five percent chance of being right if we say sometime
between A.D. 164 and 764. This clock ticks in centuries. But the
radiocarbon clock doesn’t tick very long, even in centuries, before
running down. By the time 30,000 to 40,000 years have gone by, the C-14
in any sample is almost gone, and there is too little left to give
enough geiger counter clicks unless one is willing to wait a lifetime to
record two or three clicks.

The C-14 dating technique measures time by radioactive decomposition of
materials. There are other clocks which depend on the chemical
decomposition of materials. The forgery of the Piltdown Man fossil was
detected by a dating method which depends on the decomposition of bone
protein and its replacement by fluorine. Fluorine is an element which
occurs naturally as a gas, but which combines readily with other
elements to form compounds. Some of these elements are common in bones.
Since fluorine is one of nature’s most reactive elements, it tends to
escape from the compound it is in and to form other compounds. As the
protein in a bone decays, it is often replaced by fluorine. The amount
of fluorine in old bones, then, is expected to be more than in young
bones since it has had more time to accumulate. Since fluorine does not
accumulate at a constant rate, it affords only a relative measure of
age.

In the case of Piltdown, a group of bones was discovered at a site, and
was said to contain those of one individual who lived about 60,000 years
ago. Almost 100 years after they were discovered, these bones were put
to the fluorine test. It was found that (1) some of the bones had less
fluorine than others, so not all were of the same antiquity and could
not have belonged to the same individual, (2) the younger bones had as
much fluorine in them as modern bones, and (3) the older bones had more
fluorine in them than bones known to be 60,000 years old.

    [Illustration: (uncaptioned)]

Another form of absolute dating of importance to archaeology is that
called the _varve_ method. This can only be utilized as an absolute
clock under very special circumstances however. Varves are like tree
rings in a way. In a lake which is sufficiently deep, or at the edge of
a glacier, particles of sediment are being deposited continuously as a
sort of fallout from the water. During the winter, when the glacier
freezes or the density of the water in the lake increases because of the
cooler temperature, less particles are deposited, and those which are
deposited are usually of a characteristic color or texture. During the
summer, when the glacier melts or the lake warms up, more and different
particles are deposited. The bands of deposited sediment are called
varves; every year two varves are formed. Starting from the top, one can
count back the number of years in a varve series. If the top varve is of
known date such as the present year, one has a calendar with each varve
having a known date. Attempts are made to correlate one varve series
with another in order to recover even longer series. If the
archaeologist is lucky, and it is not rare in Europe, there will be
materials from a site buried in the local varve sequence. Counting back
gives an absolute age for the artifacts embedded in the site and thus an
approximate age for the site. The European varve chronology is believed
to extend back to about 9650 B.C.

Most of the clocks which the archaeologist uses to produce relative
dates, the before-or-after kind, have as their theoretical basis the
principle of _stratigraphy_. In effect the principle of stratigraphy
assumes two things: that the rocks of the earth are constantly wearing
down by erosion, and that things which appear to be alike actually are
alike and are probably more or less the same age.

If rocks are constantly wearing down, it follows that the surface of the
ground is constantly building up. Thus the surface we walk on is a
younger, higher surface than that which our ancestors walked on. When we
dig below the surface, those things we find which are at higher levels
are younger than those which we find at lower levels. The deeper we dig,
the older things get.

There is no reason to believe that the rate of deposition on the surface
is the same everywhere. If we dig two feet in one place we may be at a
level which is now five feet below the surface in another location. If
we find a particular object, say a type of pottery, on the surface at
site A and the same kind of pottery five feet below the surface at site
B, we can use the second of our assumptions and maintain that both
pieces are of the same age. Then any objects found at higher levels than
five feet at site B are younger than the piece of pottery and are
younger than anything found at site A. This is the principle of
stratigraphy.

Like tree rings, objects in _stratigraphic sequence_ can be crossdated.
These sequences may be of various kinds as any object will do.
Distinctive bands of sediment, distinctive artifacts, types of fossils,
specific details of chemistry or any other phenomenon may be used with
varying amounts of success. Suppose we have the following sequences of
objects at sites A and B:

    [Illustration: (uncaptioned)]

                A                               B

          _Black earth_                    _Brown dust_
            _Caliche_                     _Black earth_
          _Eroded layer_                    _Caliche_
            _Cobbles_                     _Yellow silt_
              _Soil_                       _Brown silt_
           _Brown silt_                   _Eroded layer_
                                            _Cobbles_

Now there are some things that are similar about these two _profiles_
and other things that are different. Both profiles contain layers of
black earth, caliche, an eroded layer and cobbles. Both profiles contain
pottery, and both contain arrow points. The type of pottery in profile A
is the same as that in profile B, but in B there is brown dust above the
black earth. In profile B the brown silt is above the eroded layer,
while in A it is below the eroded layer. In profile A the arrow points
have different shapes than the ones in profile B. What we need to
correlate the sequences are _horizon markers_, objects that are enough
alike to be in the same time range.

The pots in both cases look the same and are embedded in the same kind
of sediment, the black earth. They form one horizon. The caliche may be
a horizon marker, but this is not positive since at profile A it is
above the eroded layer, while at profile B it is above the yellow silt.
The eroded layer sits above cobbles at both profiles, which makes the
eroded layer-cobbles complex a pretty good horizon marker. The brown
silt is not a horizon marker because it is above the eroded layer at one
profile and below it at the other. Furthermore, the arrow points which
it contains are not all of the same kind. The correlated sequence, using
the horizon markers, must be as shown in the accompanying chart.

The stratigraphy proves that the arrowheads in the upper brown silt must
be younger than those in the lower brown silt. The next time we find
arrowheads of the types recovered in the upper brown silt we will know,
regardless of the stratigraphic sequence in the new locality, that they
must be younger than the types found in the lower brown silt, and they
must also be older than pottery of the type found in the black earth. We
won’t know how many years old they are, but we have dated them in the
sense that we know they are older than some things and younger than
others.

The principle of stratigraphy is one of the archaeologist’s most useful
theoretical tools as it allows one site to be compared with others. Our
example has shown how artifacts (pots and arrowheads in this case) and
sediment types can be placed in stratigraphic order to provide a clock
for archaeological dating. Other objects which are commonly used as
horizon markers in stratigraphic sequences are fossils. Remains of
extinct animals are often used to prove extreme antiquity. Remains of
plants and animals will often indicate similarity of ecological
conditions at two sites and allow them to be crossdated.

    [Illustration: (uncaptioned)]

                              _Brown dust_
                             _Black earth_
                               _Caliche_
                             _Yellow silt_
                              _Brown silt_
                             _Eroded layer_
                               _Cobbles_
                                 _Soil_
                              _Brown silt_

The _geologic-climatic_ method of dating combines the principle of
stratigraphy with an interpretation of the meaning of natural
occurrences. When geologists demonstrated that the earth had recently
gone through a period when enormous glaciers advanced and retreated
across the northern and southern hemispheres, they began to speculate on
the effects of such conditions on the landscape. The surface would be
scraped down to bare rock by the advancing ice sheet. When the ice
retreated, its load of rocks and cobbles would tend to be left behind,
while the smaller particles of dirt would be flushed away in the rivers
formed by the melting ice. If the archaeologist found tools among the
boulders and cobbles, those tools should date to the period when the
cobble and boulder stratum was formed, the period when the glacier was
retreating. Here the geology gave clues to the climate, and if the age
of the climatic event was known, artifacts associated with the geology
could be dated.

It is through the geologic-climatic method of dating that archaeologists
discovered that human beings lived in southern Europe at the margin of
the last great glacier, and therefore the date of their occupation was
on the order of 20,000 years ago.

It is not necessary to use the geologic aspect of geologic-climatic
dating if one has other clues to the climate. Plant and animal fossils
are clues to ancient climates, since living organisms have a tendency to
live in climates to which they are best adapted. If we find the fossil
bones of a giraffe or an ostrich in the Sahara Desert, we can conclude
that at some time in the past the Sahara was not a desert but a veldt,
since giraffes and ostriches live in the veldt today. If stratigraphy
allows us to relate artifacts to those fossils, we can maintain that the
makers of those artifacts lived at the time the veldt existed in what is
now the Sahara area. Now if we can relate the fossils to a date when
such a climate could have obtained in the area, we have a date for the
artifacts.

Animal fossils are relatively rare, and fossil remains of plants which
can be seen with the naked eye are even rarer. But microscopic pollen
grains are not particularly rare in the stratigraphic sequences of
sediments, and are directly associated with artifacts in many kinds of
sediment. The pollen of most plants is protected by a tough coat like
that on many seeds. Millions of pollen grains are produced by local
vegetation each year, and a percentage of them are buried in the yearly
accumulation of sediment. Once they are buried, the tough outer covering
is preserved.

    [Illustration: (uncaptioned)]

When pollen grains are extracted from their sediment matrix, the
different types of plants which grew in the area at the time the
sediment was laid down can be recognized from the distinctive
characteristics of their pollen grains. The _pollen analyst_ has the job
of interpreting this information to discover the nature of the
vegetation patterns in the past and the climates associated with them.
Through dating those climates, the artifacts with which the pollen
sample was associated are dated.

Some archaeological sites do not allow dating by any of these methods.
The farmer plowing a field may pick up an arrowhead and wonder how old
it is. Can the archaeologist date the arrowhead? The answer is a
qualified yes. What the archaeologist will try to do is give an educated
guess as to the age of the arrowhead. He might, for example, know that
arrowheads of that type are found at a site which is dated about A.D.
1000 by various methods. By correlation, he could apply that date.

If the arrowhead is not of a type which has been reliably dated, the
archaeologist may rely upon the method of dating known as _seriation_.
This method depends on the second assumption basic to the principle of
stratigraphy, that similar objects tend to be about the same age. The
farmer’s arrowhead may not be exactly like any which has ever been
discovered, but it probably will be more like some known ones than
others. Observing the general style of the arrowhead and the way in
which it is made, the archaeologist can make a pretty good estimate of
when it was made.

Let us assume that the archaeologist goes into an unexplored area where
no absolute or relative dating techniques are available. There he finds
a number of sites with potsherds of types new to archaeology. Can he
date these sites? Again he uses seriation, but this time he inverts the
logical proposition. If things which look alike tend to be of the same
age, things which do not look alike should tend to be of different ages.

His first task would be to separate all the different types of
potsherds. Taking a specimen of each type, he lays them out in a row. If
there is any difference in the sites through time, the styles of pottery
will change correspondingly. But there will be some styles which change
slowly and some which will influence others. For example, if we were to
seriate the style of automobile rear fenders for the period 1956 to
1964, we would observe that they began to sprout taller and taller fins;
then the size of the fins became reduced more and more. Some of the
style aspects of pre-1956 rear fenders went along with the development
of fins and others dropped out. Some of the style aspects which were
developed with the fins were retained after the fins decreased in size.

Seriation of the design styles on the potsherds will result in a series
of developments in style which are probably in chronological order.
Broad straight line designs may give way to mixed broad and narrow
straight lines, then to narrow straight lines, then to narrow wavy
lines. The archaeologist could then maintain that sites which have
potsherds with broad straight lines are separate in time from those with
sherds having narrow wavy lines. He won’t know which is the older,
because the sequence could work either way. Stratigraphy or the cultural
similarity between other artifacts at the sites will probably resolve
this problem.

The reader will now have realized that many of the clocks used by
archaeologists are interrelated. Relative dating clocks such as
stratigraphy, pollen dating and geologic-climatic dating are utilized
together where possible, and all are dependent upon the principle of
stratigraphy. Crossdating is thus of vital importance and is constantly
undertaken. The archaeologist tries to employ both absolute and relative
clocks to find out the age of a site. Stratigraphy yields a series of
relative dates for artifacts within the site; geologic-climatic and
pollen dating yield a series of dates for types of sediment and samples
collected in association with those artifacts; tree ring dates yield the
absolute age of the site which allows the pollen, stratigraphic and
geologic-climatic dates to be comprehended in terms of absolute age.
Radiocarbon dates act as a check on the tree ring dates and, if they
agree, lend support to the pollen and geologic-climatic dates. The
pollen and geologic-climatic dates from the site are compared with
similar dates from other sites as additional checks. Since the clocks
used by the archaeologist tick at different rates of speed, and since
not all of them are dating the same thing, the archaeologist usually
ends with a series of dates for any given site.

New geochronological techniques are always being invented and perfected.
Here is a list of some that are expected to become available in the next
few years:

1. The _obsidian hydration_ method. Obsidian, a naturally formed glass,
is so constituted chemically that it takes chemicals from its
environment at a slow rate. As it does so, the outside layer changes
from transparent to translucent or opaque. The depth of the opaque
layer, it is hoped, can be used as a measure of the amount of time since
the surface was exposed. As many artifacts were made by chipping
obsidian to form a sharp edge, this method may reveal the time since an
obsidian artifact was made.

2. The _thermoluminescence_ method. The chemical properties of certain
minerals change when the minerals are heated to high temperatures. If
they are heated again they will glow, and the amount of time they glow
upon reheating depends on the amount of time that has elapsed since they
were heated originally. As yet the rate has not been accurately
calculated, nor is it yet understood what effect different kinds of
soils and atmospheres may have on this rate. If the method is proven, it
will be invaluable to archaeology since it will afford a way of dating
pottery directly on an absolute time scale.

3. The _paleomagnetism_ method. When an object containing particles
which can be magnetized is heated, the magnetic particles line up
according to the earth’s magnetic field. When the object cools, the
particles are trapped in this position. We know that the earth’s
magnetic field is changeable, and that at different times it has been
oriented in different directions. Work is now in progress to determine
how the field has varied through time and how successfully one can date
materials such as pottery or hearths which were exposed to high
temperatures in the past by the difference between the present magnetic
field and that trapped in the object.


                       Museum of New Mexico Press
                            Santa Fe    1965

                     _Illustrations by Mary Spencer
                          and Phyllis Hughes_




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW OLD IS IT? THE STORY OF DATING
IN ARCHEAOLOGY ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
